# music


# Tension and Relief

src: https://www.masterclass.com/articles/ways-to-create-tension-and-release-in-music

## What Is Tension in Music?
Tension in music production is the anticipating build up of rhythm, harmony, melody, and dynamics. When songwriters or composers build up tension in a song, they create a feeling of unrest or expectation, which can develop an emotional experience for the listener.

## What Is Release in Music?
The release in a music track comes when enough tension has built up, creating a relaxing or satisfying feeling for the listener. When you release tension in music, you provide a resolution for the piece of music, which allows the song to recreate tension once again, moving the song forward.

## How to Create Tension and Release in Music
Tension and release occur in every song, even the most relaxing or soothing ones. Notes in a composition build to moments that create feelings and expectations for listeners, eventually leading to release, which is the change that occurs to finally break the tension. You can create tension and release in music in the following ways:

  1. Repetition. Repeating the same bundle of chords or notes creates rhythmic tension by establishing a predictable pattern and putting emphasis on these sounds. Depending on the style of music, a sudden chord change that breaks up the repetition can either produce a satisfying release for the build up, or create more tension by pulling the listener out of their audio comfort zone.

  2. Dissonance. Create harmonic tension by putting two notes together that feel unstable or uneasy (like a middle C and its neighboring semitone, C-sharp). Dissonant note pairings are often used in horror films or video games, and even in comedy productions to escalate tension and produce excitement. The listener wants reconciliation for the notes, which feeds into the anticipation of where the music is going. Release comes when the notes once again achieve consonance or harmony.
  
  3. Key changes. When a song shifts between keys, it creates anticipation to return to its resolutive tone, the original tonic chord, which serves as the tonal center for a composition. Adding minor keys or moving out of the familiar note zone can also contribute to musical tension, where the listener feels uneasy until the music returns to its initial sound. 
  
  4. Dynamics. Music that increases in pitch or loudness builds toward a climax for the listener. Music can get louder gradually or suddenly, and each way delivers its own unique feeling of tension. The chord progression eventually has to reach a crescendo and fall again, which is how the song—and thus, the listener—achieves release. Silence is also a part of music’s dynamicness.
  
  5. Restriction. Some music, like EDM, relies on building tension by holding off longer to release. An exciting build up of a rhythmic pattern leads to a climactic moment (also known as “the drop”), where reaching the peak of the music achieves release.
  
  6. Restriction. Some music, like EDM, relies on building tension by holding off longer to release. An exciting build up of a rhythmic pattern leads to a climactic moment (also known as “the drop”), where reaching the peak of the music achieves release.

# Hans Zimmer’s 13 Tips for Film Scoring

src: https://www.masterclass.com/articles/how-hans-zimmer-composes-film-scores-like-batman-and-lion-king#hans-zimmers-13-tips-for-film-scoring

Music theory also plays a part. When writing music for a film score, Zimmer starts by thinking of a theme as a conversation or as a set of questions and answers.

To try this out yourself, find a scene you love in a film, and create an original score by setting up a question and answer motif. Think about the fact that you know how the scene ends before the audience does, and establish a question at the beginning knowing how the scene will conclude. Write a cue that highlights those questions and answer them.

That’s just one tip from Zimmer about writing movie scores. Here are 13 more, directly from the master himself.

  1. Choose a Theme Key. First, you need to pick a key—and stick with it. Zimmer takes this approach, rarely using many key changes. He mentions he likes to write in D, which gives him the solid ground and freedom he needs to create an original theme. Choose a key that gives you the room to express a full range of emotions.
  2. Tell a Story. Your job as a composer is to tell a story; stick to the story and never abandon it. You will develop a score that coexists elegantly with the images and words, and colors the world the director creates. To do this, you must live in the world of the story. Think about the main characters in the film, and their journey. What does their story say to you about the human condition?
  3. Learn the Rules of the Story. To begin living in the world of the story, learn the rules of it from your director. Working within these rules is like playing a game. The rules help you avoid arriving at a mashup of different Play-Doh colors. Only once you’ve established a strong framework of rules for yourself to build from, you can then start to break those rules to add a bit of “freshness.”
  4. Don’t Get Too Technical Right Away. Films aren’t made by committee. Your duty is to follow the director’s lead and create a shared musical vision. If you jump into discussing music specifically or even technically, you may miss important subtext that informs the director’s intention. Zimmer makes a habit of starting conversations with directors as early as possible and allowing that conversation to inform how the music will shape the story. Avoid having those “reality” conversations that are imagination-killers, and save those for the producer.
  5. Start Writing ASAP. Zimmer likes to write music as soon as possible, even before filming begins, to help influence the direction on set. He avoids temporary music because it can pigeonhole him into something that limits his freedom and creativity. The most effective environment exists when everyone on set works towards serving the story, and uses their individual voices (and talents) to do so. Trust your collaborators’ instincts and help influence their creativity by giving them your music early on in the process.
  6. Keep a Music Diary. Zimmer keeps a music diary in which he writes and captures his ideas from day to day. He doesn’t edit prior work, instead moving on and continuing to develop certain ideas to find the right themes and styles for the film. To keep a music diary, start writing, even if you don’t think it works. You can always leave it out of your score. Don’t go back and edit your own work. Keep writing! You might find that an old, untouched piece works better for a different section of the film. Don’t worry about transitions between pieces; you’re not creating a full score just yet. You can play with tempos in your diary as well.
  7. Write for Doris. Find your Doris. Zimmer has created a persona for whom he writes. This helps him ground his approach to ensure that he’s giving his audience an escape, an experience that she wouldn’t have in her day-to-day life. Write for Doris, and then test the score in front of an audience to see if you’ve achieved the escape they’re looking for.
  8. Create a Sound Palette. Sound palettes are used to design the world of the film and give them unique atmospheres. Zimmer considers music and image as complements to one another, and attempts to create sound palettes that coexist with the cinematographer’s approach to telling the story. He also thinks every composer should study light, color, and editing to help with the world-building. He says it’s important to set up the sound palette early in the film, to inform
and invite the audience on the journey into the world that your sounds help build.
  9. Take the Audience on a Journey—But Don’t Take It for Them. Know also when to avoid Mickey Mousing: don’t always hit the cut. By doing so, you can give the audience too much information about what emotion they should feel, which takes them out of the journey. Take them on the journey with you, don’t take it for them. And if the story is complicated, use music to your advantage to entertain them and help tell the story. Zimmer often talks about his approach to scoring Black Hawk Down, and allowing the score to hit the action one frame ahead of the action on screen. This creates a sense of tension, the idea of an event coming out of nowhere. Watch the film and think about the difference in feeling and emotion had he approached it by hitting the action and hitting the cuts.
  10. Take the Audience on a Journey—But Don’t Take It for Them. Know also when to avoid Mickey Mousing: don’t always hit the cut. By doing so, you can give the audience too much information about what emotion they should feel, which takes them out of the journey. Take them on the journey with you, don’t take it for them. And if the story is complicated, use music to your advantage to entertain them and help tell the story. Zimmer often talks about his approach to scoring Black Hawk Down, and allowing the score to hit the action one frame ahead of the action on screen. This creates a sense of tension, the idea of an event coming out of nowhere. Watch the film and think about the difference in feeling and emotion had he approached it by hitting the action and hitting the cuts.
  11. Find the Right Tempo. Finding the right tempo might be intuitive by this point in Zimmer’s career, but it isn’t that way for everyone. Your editor will be your guide as you narrow in on the tempo that best fits the scene at hand. Use the edit as the drum for your score, and determine a BPM from which to build your score that coexists with the edit. Zimmer will start composing by setting a metronome. The click is steady, reliable, and serves as your grid as you map out the pace of the drama. Zimmer used to watch a scene, then turn the picture on to write, and turn it back on to see if his composition and the scene matched up. Now, he’s able to identify common bpms. He mentions that 80 BPM is a great starting point, as it is seductive but easily fits with faster paced scenes. 60 BPM is a bit slower and easier to get more profound, whereas 140 is a bit more energetic and dancy.
  12. Find the Right Tempo. Finding the right tempo might be intuitive by this point in Zimmer’s career, but it isn’t that way for everyone. Your editor will be your guide as you narrow in on the tempo that best fits the scene at hand. Use the edit as the drum for your score, and determine a BPM from which to build your score that coexists with the edit. Zimmer will start composing by setting a metronome. The click is steady, reliable, and serves as your grid as you map out the pace of the drama. Zimmer used to watch a scene, then turn the picture on to write, and turn it back on to see if his composition and the scene matched up. Now, he’s able to identify common bpms. He mentions that 80 BPM is a great starting point, as it is seductive but easily fits with faster paced scenes. 60 BPM is a bit slower and easier to get more profound, whereas 140 is a bit more energetic and dancy.
  13. Revisions Should Be a Collaboration. Zimmer tells us that revisions should be a conversation between the composer and director, rather than about giving feedback and notes. It’s a collaboration, the goal of which is trying to find and write the best music for the story.
